
## Comparing algorithms

::: TODO
- Prio 3: discuss how to abstract away things
:::

If you have two algorithms that solves the same problem, how do you compare them in terms of efficiency?
One way is to do an [empirical analysis]{.term}:
implement both algorithms as computer programs and run them on a suitable range of inputs,
measuring how much of the resources in question each program uses.

This approach is often unsatisfactory, and there are two main reasons for that.
First, testing can never cover all possible inputs and selecting good test cases is difficult.
It's easy to forget to include some important types of tests,
and this could unfairly favour one algorithm.
Second, it is often the case that one of the programs was "better written" than the other,
and therefore the qualities of the underlying algorithms are not truly represented by their implementations.

These problems can often be avoided by using [asymptotic analysis]{.term}.
The basic idea is to abstract away details so that we can measure
how an algorithm behaves as the input size becomes larger and larger.

<!-- It is actually an estimating technique and does not tell us anything about the
relative merits of two programs where one is always "slightly faster"
than the other. However, asymptotic analysis has proved useful to
computer scientists who must determine if a particular algorithm is
worth considering for implementation. -->

### What to measure

The critical resource for a program is most often its running time.
However, you cannot pay attention to running time alone. You must also
be concerned with other factors such as the space required to run the
program (both main memory and disk space). Typically you will analyse
the *time* required for an *algorithm*, and the *space* required for a *data structure*.

Many factors affect the running time of a program, and the space it uses.
Some relate to the environment in which the program is compiled and run.
Such factors include the speed of the computer's CPU, bus, and peripheral hardware.
Competition with other users for the computer's (or the network's)
resources can make a program slow to a crawl. The programming language
and the quality of code generated by a particular compiler can have a
significant effect. The "coding efficiency" of the programmer who
converts the algorithm to a program can have a tremendous impact as well.

If you need to get a program working within time and space constraints
on a particular computer, all of these factors can be relevant. Yet,
none of these factors address the differences between two algorithms or
data structures.

<!-- To be fair, if you want to compare two programs derived
from two algorithms for solving the same problem, they should both be
compiled with the same compiler and run on the same computer under the
same conditions. As much as possible, the same amount of care should be
taken in the programming effort devoted to each program to make the
implementations "equally efficient". In this sense, all of the factors
mentioned above should cancel out of the comparison because they apply
to both algorithms equally. -->

If you truly wish to understand the running time of an algorithm, there
are other factors that are more appropriate to consider than machine
speed, programming language, compiler, and so forth. Ideally we would
measure the running time of the algorithm under standard benchmark
conditions. However, we have no way to calculate the running time
reliably other than to run an implementation of the algorithm on some
computer. The only alternative is to use some other measure as a
surrogate for running time.

In the end, asymptotic algorithm analysis can be phrased as the following question:

> How much *resources* does an algorithm use, in relation to *quantitative properties* of its input?

### Quantitative properties of the input

Sometimes the input is a single number, and the behaviour of the algorithm depends on how large that number is.
One example is Euclid's algorithm for finding the GCD (greatest common divisor) of two integers:
the runtime of the algorithm is proportinal to the logarithm of the largest integer.

However, the input to an algorithm is usualy a complex object, such as an array
or one of the data structures we will present later in the book.
There are many features of the input that affect the behaviour of the algorithm,
but in asymptotic analysis the only parameter of interest is the *size* of the input.

So, in asymptotic analysis we approximate the input with a single number (often written $n$).
Usually this is *not* the size in bytes, but instead we try to find
some easily calculated number that is proportional to the actual input size:
it can be the size of an array, or the length of a string, or the number of vertices in a graph, etc.

### Resource usage

Now, what do we mean by the *resources* that we want to measure?
This depends on what kind of behaviour we want to analyse:

- Sometimes we are interested in *space* usage.
  In this case we don't use the computer memory in bytes, of the same reason as for runtime.
  Instead we use some easily calculated number, such as the size of an array, or the number of objects of a certain kind.

- But in most cases we are interested in measuring the *runtime*.
  In this case we don't use the actual time in seconds, because this depends on details such as what computer you are using.
  Instead we use some surrogate measure, such as the number of "basic operations" that are performed by the algorithm.

The term "basic operation" is rather vague and depends on the algorithm being analysed.
A basic operation must have the property that it always takes the same time to run.
Adding or comparing two numbers are examples of basic operations in most programming languages,
as are assigning a variable or retrieving an array value at a given position.
But summing the all values in an array is not, because the time depends on the size of the array.

We often express the runtime of an algorithm as a function of the input size $n$, written as $T(n)$.
If we are interested in the space usage we sometimes write $S(n)$.
Note that both the input size $n$, as well as the resource usage $T(n)$ and $S(n)$, are always non-negative.

::: example
#### Example: Sequential search

Recall the sequential search algorithm from @sec:sequential-search,
it searches for a given value in an array.
The size of the input is the size of the array -- let's call it $n$.
The algorithm looks at each array value in turn, comparing with the given value.
If the value is found it returns the position, otherwise it continues until the end of the array.

    function sequentialSearch(arr, val):
        for i in 0 .. arr.size - 1:   // For each element in arr,
            if arr[i] == val:         //     if we found it
                return i              //         return this position.
        return null                   // Otherwise, return null

What basic operation should we measure?
The most obvious is to count the number of *comparisons*, that is, the number of times the `if`-test is run.
It is reasonable to assume that one such comparison takes a fixed amount of time,
regardless of the values or their positions in the array, so it is a basic operation.

Let us call $c$ the amount of time required to compare two integers in the function.
We do not care what the precise value of $c$ might be.
Nor are we concerned with the time required to increment
variable $i$ because this must be done for each value in the array.
We just want a reasonable approximation for the time taken to execute the algorithm.
Now, the algorithm makes $n$ loop iterations, and since each comparison costs $c$,
we can express the running time of the algorithm as:

$$
T(n) = c\cdot n
$$

Therefore the running time of the sequential search is proportional to the size of the input.
This is called a *linear* running time
(and therefore the algorithm is sometimes called *linear search*).
:::

::: example
#### Example: Calculating the median-of-three

The following is a function that calculates the *median* of the first,
the middle and the last values in a given array.
(This is a useful *pivot* selection for Quicksort, which will be discussed in @sec:quicksort.)

    function medianOfThree(arr):
        n = arr.size
        a = arr[0]; b = arr[n/2]; c = arr[n-1]
        if a < b:
            if b < c:      return b
            else if a < c: return c
            else:          return a
        else:
            if a < c:      return a
            else if b < c: return c
            else:          return b

When the function is called it will do at most four variable assignments and three comparisons,
no matter how large the array is.
Let us assume that an assignment takes $c_1$ time, and a comparison takes $c_2$ time.
Then the runtime equation for the function is $T(n) = 4\cdot c_1+3\cdot c_2$.
This indicates that the size of the input $n$ has no effect on the running time.
This is called a *constant* running time.
:::

::: example
#### Example: Bubble sort

Recall the Bubble sort algorithm from @sec:bubble-sort:

    function bubbleSort(arr):
        n = arr.size
        for i in 0 .. n-2:
            for j in 1 .. n-i-1:
                if arr[j-1] > arr[j]:
                    swap(arr, j-1, j)

<!-- What is the running time for this algorithm? -->
<!-- Clearly it takes longer to run when $n$ is larger, but how much longer? -->
There are two possible basic operations that we can count:
the `if`-clause comparison and the `swap` operation -- which one should we use?
In this example we *cannot* use count the number of swaps,
because if the array is already sorted there will be no swaps at all.
Instead we must count the number of comparisons.
We can assume that comparing two array values takes constant time; call this time $c_3$.
(We can ignore the time required to increment the loop counters `i` and `j`.
In practice, these costs can safely be bundled into time $c_3$.)

The outer `i` loop runs $n$ times,
and for each iteration the inner `j` runs at most $n$ times.
To be more precise, the inner loop first runs $n$ times,
then $n-1$ times, then $n-2$ times, and so on.
The total number of comparisons is therefore
$n+(n-1)+(n-2)+\cdots+1$, which can be simplified to $n(n+1)/2$.
This is approximately $1/2\cdot n^2$, meaning that
the running time is $T(n) \approx c_3/2 \cdot n^2$.
This is proportional to $n^2$, and we call this a *quadratic* running time.
:::
